# Impressions At Work
[Apr 20, 2023 at 2:35 PM]

  

I just listened to this pretty excellent presentation from this project lead for the SLC Temple renovation. I'm still making sense of it. But overall I had some impressions.

  

1. I need to switch up how I'm currently studying the gospel, it needs to become principle-based, and I need to put together slide shows, as if I'm presenting to my teenage daughters. This is important, and I need to do it. ~15m presentations on 'Faith', 'God', 'Repentance', 'Baptism', etc. It needs to be messy and editable, so I can drag in quotes from google searches and screenshots of gospel art, and it needs to be my own words, and I need to write lecture notes. This is wildly important. This will constitute my gospel study. Read a little from the B.O.M. and then get to work on this new project.
    
2. I need to take inventory of my spiritual life, and putting it off doesn't help anyone.
    
3. I need to do "state of the Mike" I can use powerpoint to help me marshal my thoughts for that presentation, work on it here and there a little bit over time until I have it just right, then boom, record it in 15 mins or less, and do zero editing. boom. done.
    
4. How fun is it, to be able to pull up a quote from a prophet and then show my own pictures and graphs and documentation proving that this is what I'm doing in my life, and here is why I'm doing it, it's because of these gospel principles. This is massively important for my own sanity.
    
5.